..
   Copyright Spack Project Developers. See COPYRIGHT file for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: (Apache-2.0 OR MIT)

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:
      Learn how to configure and customize module file generation in Spack for Environment Modules and Lmod.

.. _modules:

Modules (modules.yaml)
======================

The use of module systems to manage user environments in a controlled way is a common practice at HPC centers that is sometimes embraced also by individual programmers on their development machines.
To support this common practice Spack integrates with `Environment Modules <http://modules.sourceforge.net/>`_ and `Lmod <http://lmod.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ by providing post-install hooks that generate module files and commands to manipulate them.

Modules are one of the several ways you can use installed packages, along with :ref:`spack load <spack-load>` and :ref:`environments <environments>`.

Quick start
-----------

Spack can generate both Tcl and Lua module files, either with a post-install hook or at user's request through a command.

If you're using the default configuration values, you can start by generating Tcl module files for all currently installed packages:

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack module tcl refresh

To generate Lua module files simply use the ``spack module lmod`` command instead of ``spack module tcl``.

Once module files are in place, add the Tcl module directory generated above to your module path:

.. code-block:: console

   $ module use $SPACK_ROOT/share/spack/modules/$(spack arch)

You can now browse and load the available modules:

.. code-block:: console

   $ module avail

   ------------------------------------------------------------ <spack-root>/share/spack/modules/linux-ubuntu24.04-skylake ------------------------------------------------------------
   bison/3.8.2-gcc-13.3.0-hs4pc4c                        flex/2.6.3-gcc-13.3.0-jz6pfzf            libevent/2.1.12-gcc-13.3.0-5k3sh64    openmpi/5.0.10-gcc-13.3.0-fjv7c7n
   ca-certificates-mozilla/2026-03-19-none-none-som6bt4  gcc-runtime/13.3.0-none-none-5opaxqi     libpciaccess/0.17-gcc-13.3.0-rcke4u2  openssh/10.3p1-gcc-13.3.0-bwrgshz
   cmake/3.31.11-gcc-13.3.0-g2bzgpi                      gromacs/2026.1-gcc-13.3.0-lyxhacq        libxcrypt/4.5.2-gcc-13.3.0-2snor6m    openssl/3.6.1-gcc-13.3.0-fhuz67z
   compiler-wrapper/1.1.0-none-none-zr6dbk4              hwloc/2.13.0-gcc-13.3.0-a4elwgb          nghttp2/1.67.1-gcc-13.3.0-oofdxin     pmix/6.1.0-gcc-13.3.0-gwijn2q
   curl/8.20.0-gcc-13.3.0-jdcsqbb                        krb5/1.22.2-gcc-13.3.0-cg4l6qb           numactl/2.0.19-gcc-13.3.0-p7sk7en     prrte/4.1.0-gcc-13.3.0-wrgywxy
   fftw/3.3.11-gcc-13.3.0-addcjv5                        libedit/3.1-20251016-gcc-13.3.0-fv2f7sz  openblas/0.3.33-gcc-13.3.0-ew5pzcz    util-macros/1.20.2-none-none-l3eawtn

   $ module load openmpi/5.0.10-gcc-13.3.0-fjv7c7n

The default module names encode the package version, compiler, and a short hash to distinguish builds with different configurations.
Of course, it's possible to customize the naming scheme to match your site's conventions, as the following sections will show.

Module file customization
-------------------------

The table below summarizes the essential information associated with the different file formats that can be generated by Spack:


+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+------------------+
| Language | Default           | Default root directory  | Default template file                            | Compatible tools |
|          | hierarchical mode |                         |                                                  |                  |
+==========+===================+=========================+==================================================+==================+
| ``Tcl``  | non-hierarchical  | ``share/spack/modules`` | ``share/spack/templates/modules/modulefile.tcl`` | Environment      |
|          |                   |                         |                                                  | Modules, Lmod    |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+------------------+
| ``Lua``  | hierarchical      | ``share/spack/lmod``    | ``share/spack/templates/modules/modulefile.lua`` | Lmod             |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+------------------+

.. _flat-vs-hierarchical:

Flat and hierarchical module files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In **flat** (non-hierarchical) mode, all module files are installed in a single directory.
Default settings are such that:

* Each module name encodes the package version, compiler, and a hash to distinguish builds with different configurations.
* Every installed package has a visible module, and dependencies are made available through :ref:`autoloading <autoloading-dependencies>`.

The naming scheme can be customized as the :ref:`modules-projections` section shows.

In **hierarchical** mode, module files are organized into layers: ``Core``, ``Compiler``, and optionally additional layers such as ``mpi``, ``lapack``, or ``python``.
Loading a compiler module extends ``MODULEPATH`` to reveal the packages built with that compiler.
Similarly, loading an MPI module reveals the MPI-dependent packages, and so on.
Users are therefore only offered packages that are coherent with their loaded environment.

Flat mode is the default for ``tcl``, while hierarchical mode is the default for ``lmod``, but either generator supports either mode.
Set ``hierarchical: true`` under the ``tcl`` key to enable hierarchical Tcl modules, or ``hierarchical: false`` under the ``lmod`` key to generate flat Lua modules.
See :ref:`hierarchical-modules` for the full configuration options and tool-version requirements.


Spack ships with sensible defaults for the generation of module files, but you can customize many aspects of it to accommodate package or site specific needs.
In general you can override or extend the default behavior by:

1. overriding certain callback APIs in the Python packages
2. writing specific rules in the ``modules.yaml`` configuration file
3. writing your own templates to override or extend the defaults

Overriding callback APIs lets you express changes in the run-time environment that are needed to use the installed software properly, e.g. injecting variables from language interpreters into their extensions.
Configuration rules and custom templates instead permit you to fine-tune the filesystem layout, content and creation of module files to meet site-specific conventions.

.. _modules-yaml:

Configuration structure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The configuration files that control module generation behavior are named ``modules.yaml``.
The default configuration looks like this:

.. literalinclude:: _spack_root/etc/spack/defaults/base/modules.yaml
   :language: yaml

You can define one or more **module sets**, each of which can be configured separately with regard to install location, naming scheme, inclusion and exclusion, autoloading, et cetera.

The default module set is aptly named ``default``.
All :ref:`Spack commands that operate on modules <maintaining-module-files>` apply to the ``default`` module set, unless another module set is specified explicitly (with the ``--name`` flag).

To automatically generate module files during package installation, add the desired module systems to the ``enable`` list:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       enable:
       - tcl
       - lmod

You can configure the behavior of either module system separately, under a key corresponding to the generator being customized:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         # contains environment modules specific customizations
       lmod:
         # contains lmod specific customizations

In general, the configuration options that you can use in ``modules.yaml`` will either change the layout of the module files on the filesystem, or they will affect their content.
For the latter point it is possible to use :ref:`spec patterns <sec-specs>` to fine-tune the set of packages on which the modifications should be applied.

The default module root can be overridden for any module set by changing the ``roots`` key of the configuration.
For example, to install ``tcl`` modules to a custom path:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       roots:
         tcl: /path/to/install/tcl/modules

By default, an architecture-specific directory is added to the root directory.
A module set may override that behavior by setting the ``arch_folder`` config value to ``false``.

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       roots:
         tcl: /path/to/install/tcl/modules
       arch_folder: false

Module layout
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, Spack encodes the package version, compiler, and a short hash into every module name to distinguish builds with different configurations.
The options in this section let you change where module files are placed on the filesystem, how they are named, whether to arrange them in a hierarchy, and which version is the default.

.. _modules-projections:

Naming and projections
""""""""""""""""""""""

Spack provides three options to make module names shorter and easier to read.
The first is a global setting to adjust the hash length.
It accepts values from 0 to 32 (default: 7):

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         hash_length: 7

A hash length of 0 removes the hash completely, making the module name more readable, but also more subject to naming conflicts.

The second option is ``suffixes``, which appends a string to the names of modules matching a spec.
For example, the following configuration adds a ``python3.12`` suffix to any package built with Python 3.12:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         all:
           suffixes:
             ^python@3: "python{^python.version.up_to_2}"
             ^openblas: "openblas"

This is useful to know which version of Python a set of Python extensions is associated with.
Likewise, the ``openblas`` string is attached to any program that has ``openblas`` in the spec, most likely via the ``+blas`` variant specification.

The third, and most flexible, option is to change the entire naming convention using the projections format covered in :ref:`view_projections`:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         projections:
           all: "{name}/{version}-{compiler.name}-{compiler.version}-module"
           ^mpi: "{name}/{version}-{^mpi.name}-{^mpi.version}-{compiler.name}-{compiler.version}-module"

Note that the default projection for module files differs by mode:

* In hierarchical mode it is ``{name}/{version}``
* In flat mode it is ``{name}/{version}-{compiler.name}-{compiler.version}``

.. _hierarchical-modules:

Hierarchical module files
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

Three keys control the shape of the hierarchy:

* ``core_compilers`` lists the compilers whose packages go in the ``Core`` layer.
* ``core_specs`` lists any additional packages that should also go in ``Core``, bypassing the normal hierarchy.
* ``hierarchy`` lists the virtual packages that define the additional layers beyond ``Core`` and ``Compiler``.

The configuration below generates a hierarchy in which the ``python``, ``lapack``, and ``mpi`` layers can be switched independently:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       lmod:
         core_compilers:
         - "gcc@13"
         core_specs:
         - "r"
         hierarchy:
         - "mpi"
         - "lapack"
         - "python"

For ``tcl``, whose default layout is flat, add ``hierarchical: true`` to the same configuration (this requires either Environment Modules >= 5.6 or Lmod >= 8.7.31).

Note that ``core_specs`` bypasses the hierarchy that allows the module tool to safely switch between coherent software stacks, so the user is responsible for maintaining consistency among those packages.

Default module versions
"""""""""""""""""""""""

To pin a specific version as the default, add a ``defaults`` key to your modules configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     my-module-set:
       tcl:
         defaults:
         - gcc@10.2.1
         - hdf5@1.2.10+mpi+hl%gcc

The spec can be as specific as needed.
If multiple packages in the same directory match, the last one generated wins.

Module content
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a user loads a module, the module system executes the module file, which sets environment variables and optionally loads dependencies.
Spack populates module files from three sources:

* Prefix inspections derived automatically from the installation layout
* Rules in ``modules.yaml`` applied to matching packages
* Callbacks defined in ``package.py`` for package-specific logic

The options in this section let you control which dependencies are autoloaded, what environment variables are set and for which packages, and which module files are generated at all.

.. _autoloading-dependencies:

Autoloading and hiding dependencies
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Each package's module file sets only the environment variables for that package itself.
Autoloading handles the rest: when a module is loaded, Spack can automatically load the modules for its dependencies, so users do not need to track them manually.

The ``autoload`` key controls the autoloading behavior, and can take one of these values:

* ``none``: no autoloading
* ``run``: autoload direct *run* type dependencies
* ``direct``: autoload direct *link and run* type dependencies
* ``all``: autoload all dependencies

``direct`` is the most correct choice, but ``run`` is often sufficient and may be faster to load.

``hide_implicits: true`` limits ``module avail`` to only the packages you explicitly installed, while still autoloading hidden dependencies.
We recommend enabling both options together:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         hide_implicits: true
         all:
           autoload: direct # or 'run'
       lmod:
         hide_implicits: true
         all:
           autoload: direct # or 'run'

This ensures all runtime variables are set correctly, limits visible modules to what users explicitly installed, and makes shorter module names easier to use without conflicts (see :ref:`modules-projections`).

Module conflicts
""""""""""""""""

Tcl and Lua modules allow for explicit conflicts between module files.
Using the ``conflict`` key under a spec pattern, you can prevent two incompatible modules from being loaded at the same time:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         all:
           conflict:
           - "{name}"
           - "intel/14.0.1"

This prevents loading any other version of the same package (via ``{name}``) or ``intel/14.0.1``.
For Lmod, and for Environment Modules versions prior to 4.2, the conflict must be expressed on both module files conflicting with each other.

.. _customize-env-modifications:

Global environment modifications
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Spack automatically adds environment variable modifications to every module file by inspecting the installation prefix.
The ``prefix_inspections`` section maps relative paths inside the prefix to the environment variables that should be updated with them.
In the configuration, paths are written relative to the installation prefix, so ``./bin`` means ``<prefix>/bin``, and ``./`` means ``<prefix>`` itself:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     prefix_inspections:
       ./bin:
       - PATH
       ./man:
       - MANPATH
       ./:
       - CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH

Unlike other module settings, ``prefix_inspections`` placed at the top ``modules`` level applies to all module sets at once.
An inspection is only applied when the corresponding subdirectory exists in the installation prefix.
The table below lists the default inspections:

+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Path                           | Environment variable           |
+================================+================================+
| ``<prefix>/bin``               | ``PATH``                       |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/man``               | ``MANPATH``                    |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/share/man``         | ``MANPATH``                    |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/share/aclocal``     | ``ACLOCAL_PATH``               |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/lib/pkgconfig``     | ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH``            |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/lib64/pkgconfig``   | ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH``            |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/share/pkgconfig``   | ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH``            |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>``                   | ``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH``          |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/lib`` (macOS)       | ``DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH`` |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``<prefix>/lib64`` (macOS)     | ``DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH`` |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+

On Linux, ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` is omitted: Spack packages embed RPATHs, making it unnecessary, and setting it globally affects system executables.

To suppress a variable from all module files, use ``exclude_env_vars``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         all:
           filter:
             exclude_env_vars: ["CPATH", "LIBRARY_PATH"]

.. _anonymous_specs:

Selective environment modifications
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The ``environment`` key lets you set, prepend, or unset variables for any set of packages matching a spec pattern.
This is useful when you want to apply a change to many packages at once, or when you prefer to keep the logic in configuration rather than in :ref:`package.py <override-api-calls-in-package-py>`.

The following example shows the four main pattern forms and the operations available under ``environment``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         # Selects every package
         all:
           environment:
             set:
               BAR: "bar"
         # Selects MPI-dependent packages. The :: clears previously matched rules
         ^mpi::
           environment:
             set:
               BAR: "baz"
         # Selects any zlib package
         zlib:
           environment:
             prepend_path:
               LD_LIBRARY_PATH: "{prefix}/lib"
         # Selects zlib compiled with gcc@13
         zlib%gcc@13:
           environment:
             unset:
             - FOOBAR

Each rule selects a set of packages and applies the corresponding modifications:

* ``all``: sets ``BAR=bar`` for every module.
* For specs matching ``^mpi::``: ``BAR`` is overridden to ``baz``.
  The trailing ``::`` clears all previously matched rules, so the ``all`` block's ``BAR=bar`` does not carry over.
* ``zlib``: prepends ``{prefix}/lib`` to ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``.
* ``zlib%gcc@13``: unsets ``FOOBAR``.

The ``all`` block is always evaluated first regardless of where it appears in the file.
All other rules are evaluated top to bottom.
As general advice, set only the variables a package actually needs: unexpected interactions with other tools are hard to debug.

.. _override-api-calls-in-package-py:

Package-specific environment modifications
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Two methods in ``package.py`` let you inject environment modifications directly into module files.

``setup_run_environment`` sets variables based on the package's own spec:

.. code-block:: python

   def setup_run_environment(self, env: EnvironmentModifications) -> None:
       if self.spec.satisfies("+foo"):
           env.set("FOO", "bar")

``setup_dependent_run_environment`` allows a package to set variables in the module files of its dependents.
This is used in interpreter packages such as ``python``, ``r``, and ``perl``.
When a dependent is built, the interpreter prepends the dependent's prefix to its search path (``PYTHONPATH``, ``R_LIBS``, or ``PERL5LIB``) so the interpreter can locate it at runtime.
A simplified ``python`` package looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

   def setup_dependent_run_environment(
       self, env: EnvironmentModifications, dependent_spec: Spec
   ) -> None:
       if dependent_spec.package.extends(self.spec):
           env.prepend_path("PYTHONPATH", dependent_spec.prefix.lib.python)

This ensures every Python extension has its library directory on ``PYTHONPATH`` without repeating the logic in each extension's ``setup_run_environment``.

Modules relative to environment views
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

When a Spack :ref:`environment <environments>` uses a view, you can configure a module set to generate module files relative to the view paths instead of the install tree.
This requires a view whose :ref:`projection <configuring_environment_views>` assigns each package a unique subdirectory.

The ``use_view`` key controls this behavior:

* ``true``: use the default view of the environment.
* a view name (e.g. ``my_view``): use that named view; prefix inspections are then relative to each package's path in the view.
* ``false``: disabled (the default).

.. code-block:: yaml

   spack:
     modules:
       view_relative_modules:
         use_view: my_view
       prefix_inspections:
         ./bin:
         - PATH
     view:
       my_view:
         root: /path/to/my/view
         projections:
           all: "{name}-{hash}"

The ``view`` key is discussed in detail in :ref:`Configuring environment views <configuring_environment_views>`.
With this configuration the generated module for package ``foo`` would set ``PATH`` to include ``/path/to/my/view/foo-<hash>/bin`` instead of ``/spack/prefix/foo/bin``.
This is useful for large deployments where view paths are simpler and more stable than install-tree paths.

Excluding packages
""""""""""""""""""

The ``exclude`` and ``include`` keys control which packages get module files generated.
For example, to suppress module files for all packages compiled with the system compiler except ``gcc`` and ``llvm`` themselves:

.. code-block:: yaml

   modules:
     default:
       tcl:
         include: ["gcc", "llvm"]  # include will have precedence over exclude
         exclude: ["%gcc@13"]   # Assuming gcc@13 is the system compiler

This suppresses module files for every package compiled with ``gcc@13``, except ``gcc`` and ``llvm``.

Combining ``exclude`` and ``autoload`` is safe: when a dependency has no module file, ``autoload`` simply omits its load statement.

.. _maintaining-module-files:

Maintaining Module Files
------------------------

Spack provides ``spack module tcl`` and ``spack module lmod`` commands for managing module files.
The available subcommands are:

.. command-output:: spack module tcl --help

.. _cmd-spack-module-refresh:

The ``refresh`` subcommand regenerates module files.
Use the optional ``constraint`` argument to regenerate only packages matching a spec pattern.
Pass ``--delete-tree`` to delete the entire module tree before regenerating, which is useful to handle a radical layout change.

.. command-output:: spack module tcl refresh --help

.. _cmd-spack-module-rm:

The ``rm`` subcommand deletes module files.
By default, Spack asks for confirmation before deleting; pass ``-y`` to skip the prompt in scripts.

.. command-output:: spack module tcl rm --help

.. _cmd-spack-module-find:

The ``find`` subcommand translates a spec into its module name, which is useful for scripting:

.. command-output:: spack module tcl find --help

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack module tcl find openmpi
   openmpi/5.0.6-gcc-13.3.0-fjv7c7n

.. _cmd-spack-module-setdefault:

The ``setdefault`` subcommand marks a specific module version as the default, creating a ``default`` symlink:

.. command-output:: spack module lmod setdefault --help


.. _modules-in-shell-scripts:

Using Spack modules in shell scripts
-------------------------------------

Spack's shell functions and the ``module`` command are only available after sourcing the appropriate setup file.
Assuming Spack is installed in ``$SPACK_ROOT``, run the appropriate command for your shell:

.. code-block:: console

   # For bash/zsh/sh
   $ . $SPACK_ROOT/share/spack/setup-env.sh

   # For tcsh/csh
   $ source $SPACK_ROOT/share/spack/setup-env.csh

   # For fish
   $ . $SPACK_ROOT/share/spack/setup-env.fish

To have Spack's shell support available at every login, add the appropriate line above to your shell's startup file (``.profile``, ``.bashrc``, or ``.cshrc``).

.. _cmd-spack-module-loads:

``spack module tcl loads``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``spack module tcl loads`` (or ``spack module lmod loads``) generates ``module load`` statements for a spec.
This is useful in scripts where calling ``spack load`` directly would be too slow.

The ``--dependencies`` flag includes load statements for all dependencies.
This is usually not needed since Spack packages embed RPATHs, but some packages, in particular Python extensions, do not.

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack module tcl loads --dependencies openmpi
   # hwloc@2.11.2%gcc@13.3.0 arch=linux-ubuntu24.04-x86_64
   module load hwloc/2.11.2-gcc-13.3.0-o7qgalw
   # numactl@2.0.19%gcc@13.3.0 arch=linux-ubuntu24.04-x86_64
   module load numactl/2.0.19-gcc-13.3.0-p7sk7en
   # pmix@6.0.0%gcc@13.3.0 arch=linux-ubuntu24.04-x86_64
   module load pmix/6.0.0-gcc-13.3.0-gwijn2q
   # openmpi@5.0.6%gcc@13.3.0 arch=linux-ubuntu24.04-x86_64
   module load openmpi/5.0.6-gcc-13.3.0-fjv7c7n

The output can be sourced directly using `process substitution <http://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/process-sub.html>`_:

.. code-block:: console

   $ source <( spack module tcl loads --dependencies <spec> )


Module Prefixes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

On some systems, modules are automatically prefixed with a string.
Use ``--prefix`` to tell ``spack module tcl loads`` about it.
For example, on a system where modules are prefixed with the architecture string, without ``--prefix`` the generated ``module load`` statement will not match the actual module name:

.. code-block:: console

   $ module avail
   linux-SuSE11-x86_64/antlr/2.7.7-gcc-5.3.0-bdpl46y

   $ spack module tcl loads antlr
   # antlr@2.7.7%gcc@5.3.0~csharp+cxx~java~python arch=linux-SuSE11-x86_64
   module load antlr/2.7.7-gcc-5.3.0-bdpl46y

   $ spack module tcl loads --prefix linux-SuSE11-x86_64/ antlr
   # antlr@2.7.7%gcc@5.3.0~csharp+cxx~java~python arch=linux-SuSE11-x86_64
   module load linux-SuSE11-x86_64/antlr/2.7.7-gcc-5.3.0-bdpl46y

The same ``--prefix`` option is available for ``spack module lmod loads``.
